Hello and welcome to computing history episode 1.2, 

Episode 1.1 was received with very positive feedback with one exception. It
was still too fast for most people. 

So let's slow things down, in fact, let's completely stop them for most of the
episode and take a step back and go over a few themes we'll be seeing
throughout the series.

A big theme and also a big myth of technological progress is the story of
reducing complexity. The narrative goes that for a given technology, overtime 
needless complexity iteratively gets chiseled away to yield a more streamlined
version which becomes increasingly cheaper and easier.

We can take a smart phone as an example. The early ones came with a
telescoping antenna, a stylus, a keyboard, and they no longer do, so there,
complexity reduced. 

Well not really, the antennaes are still there and there's actually more of
them, they just don't extend from
the device, the keyboard is certainly still there and it supports potentially
any language without needing a different device because it's all done on a
touch screen where the stylus has been replaced with better touch screens.
It's all still there.

What has happened is that more stuff is being done with fewer parts. The
process of selection and configuration are the keys here, figuring out how to
make do with less while hopefully actually achieving more with it. That's why
early version os a technology can look really elaborate and weird 

What we're going to see with the electric telegraph and essentially all
technologies in this series are models that require fewer and fewer parts but
at the same time more and more can be done with them.

One of the primary reasons for this endemic trend is due to a process which is
usually invisible in the consumer economy and one that will be another
completely separate timeline - manufacturing.

Creating one of something is always easier then creating 1000 of them and
manufacturing deals with this art. Indeed, in the early telegraphs mass
manufacturing techniques hadn't developed yet so this is why the early visions
are limited to them being highly exclusive devices only to be used by a few
handfuls of people.

So let's go back to our timeline where we'll be rewinding things back about 70
years to talk about what's so special about electricity and we'll be
suggesting why it's so useful for computing.

But don't computers require electricity? You may ask. The surpising answer is
"no, they can be made completely mechanically". They could use say, wind
turbines to store energy in a spring and then be implemented using gears,
rotating discs, levers, pulleys, no electricity at all. 

In fact, NASA started building the one I just described in 2017 intended
initially for the harsh hot surface of Venus.  Imagine putting your phone on
the end of skewer with some marshmallows and roasting it over a campfire. Yes,
that's essentially the temperature on the surface of Venus. When the soviets
landed a probe on Venus in 1972, they had designed essentially a space craft refrigerator
to maximize the amount of time they could get data. It went exactly as they
had carefully planned, which meant the probe survived about 50 minutes. 

So NASA's electricity free mechanical computing over project, 
called the Automation Rover for Extreme Environments just closed up a 
$30,000 challenge for the public to submit designs for a
mechanical sensor pack. It ended on May 29th, 2020 and results aren't
announced yet but yes, mechanical computing without electricity, totally
possible and being actively developed.

So what's so special about electricity

spice rack foreign language

themes

  thank people for positive feedback
  say things will slow down
  value of reducting complexity
  what's so special about electricity
    electric wire discovery
    material fatigue
    mechanical computers
      nasa venus 
  a brief dive into manufacturing limitations
  two room telegraph as promised
